               Smart Stick for Blind People 
Abstract — The life of blind and visually impaired people is very different. They face many 
problems in moving from one place to another. Since they cannot see, they often get hit by 
objects in roads like poles, walls, cars, people etc. as a result they may severely injured. It may 
leads to face humiliation and lose confidence in themselves. There are chances that they can 
get lost. In such cases, it is very difficult for their family members to find them. Even though 
they are provided with stick, in which they can identify the object by tapping it. It is not much 
helpful for them in order to avoid obstacles, the Smart Stick for Blind people in which visually 
impaired person can be able to detect the object from a further distance and they could avoid it 
using ultra sonic sensors, and if they are lost, using GPRS and GSM modules their family 
members can track them. Blind stick is an innovative stick designed for visually disabled people 
for improvednavigation. We here propose an advanced blind stick that allows visually 
challenged people to navigate with ease using advanced technology. The blind stick is 
integrated with ultrasonic sensor along with motors. Our proposed project first uses ultrasonic 
sensors to detect obstacles ahead using ultrasonic waves. On sensing obstacles the sensor 
passes this data to the microcontroller. The microcontroller then processes this data and 
calculates if the obstacle is close enough. If the obstacle is not that close the circuit does 
nothing. If the obstacle is close tmicrocontroller sends a signal to rotate the motorwhich in turn 
rotates the wheel when obstacle is detected so that the blind will not get frustrated due to 
continuous alarming sound of buzzer and he/she can navigate easily along the path. The system 
has one more advanced feature integrated to help the blind find their stick if they forget where 
they kept it. A wireless RF based remote is used for this purpose. Pressing the remote button 
sounds a buzzer on the stick which helps the blind person to find their stick. Thus this system 
allows for obstacle detection as well as finding stick if misplaced by visually disabled people. 
 
 
         Introduction 

    Visually impaired people are the people who can't identify smallest detail with healthy eyes. 
 Those who have the visual acuity of 6/60 or the horizontal extent of the visual field with both 
 eyes open less than or equal to 20 degrees, these people are considered blind [1]. Such people 
 are in need of aiding devices for blindness related disabilities. As described in [2] 10% of blind 
 have  no  usable  eyesight  at  all  to  help  them  move  around  independently  and  safely.  The 
 electronic  aiding   devices    are   designed    to   solve    such    issue. 
 To record information about the obstacles presence in a road, active or passive sensors can be 
 used. In case of a passive sensor, the sensor just receives a signal. It detects the reflected, 
 emitted or transmitted electro-magnetic radiation provided by natural energy sources. In case 
 of using an active sensor, the sensor emits a signal and receives a distorted version of the 
 reflected  signal.  It  detects  reflected  responses  from  objects  irradiated  with  artificially 
 generated energy sources. These kind of active sensors are capable of sensing and detecting 
far and near obstacles. In addition, it determines an accurate measurement of the distance 
between the blind  and the obstacle. Overall, in the obstacle detection domain, 
four different types of active sensors may be used: infrared, laser, ultrasonic, in addition to 
radar sensors. 
   Bat K Sonar [3], Smart Cane [4], Smart vision [5], Guide Cane [6], use ultrasonic sensors 
or laser sensors to detect obstacles in front of blind by transmitting the wave and reception 
of  reflected  waves.  It  produces  either  an  audio  or  vibration  in  response  to  detected 
obstacles to warn blind. Systems like vOICe [7], SoundView [8], SVETA [9] and CASBLIP [10], 
use  single  camera  or  stereo  video  cameras  mounted  on  a  wearable  device  to  capture 
images. These captured images are re-sized, processed further and converted to speech, 
audio, musical sounds or vibrations. In such systems, the frequency of warning sound signal 
is correlated with the orientation of pixels. Some advanced systems use Global Positioning 
System (GPS) integration with the main system. It's also noteworthy that GPS receiver is 
useful for understanding the current location of the subject and nearby landmarks. Some 
solutions are already available in the market such as: UltraCanne [11], Isonic [12], and 
Teletact [13] and others [14]. These products help blind people by collecting information 
through  sensors  and  then  transmitting  recommendations  through  vibration  or  sound 
message to the user. 
   These solutions still have many disadvantages for  example; 
   They can’t detect obstructions that are hidden but very dangerous for the blind such as 
downward  stairs,  holes  etc.  Usually,  the  feedback  information  comes  out  as  either 
vibration or sound signals. Thus, these systems communicate their recommendations to 
the user through sound or frequency vibration. 
   Consequently, training is then necessary to help the user understand the signals and to 
react to them in real time. However, such training is sometimes more expensive than the 
product  itself.  Therefore,  users  can’t  afford  it  [15].  Otherwise,  the  information  is 
transmitted as a sound it may be embarrassing for the blind person in public. 
   In our work we tried to overcome some of disadvantage: 
   •  We designed stick to detect obstacles and its able to recognize and speak aloud the 
      upward and downward stairs or puddles as shown in Fig. 1. 
   •  The  training  of  our  product  isn’t  as  expensive  as  training  in  other  product.  Our 
      training is just description of stick component and usage position. 
   •  We use two facilities to transmit information to the blind. We integrated vibration 
      motor  in  the  hand  of  stick  and  speech  warning  message  kit  that  preserving  it’s 
      natural dimension to keep it user friendly. 
   •  With  aid  of  earphone  the  speech  warning  message  kit  is able to speak aloud 
      warning message to the blind instead  of  incomprehensible  sound  and  public 
      embarrassment. 
       
      •    We achieved very fast response  time calculated as 39 ms in average distance 
      ≤400 cm before hitting the obstacles. Regarding ease of use and independence of 
      blind we added a facility of easy search to the stick in  the form of remote (location 
       or positioning of the stick). 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        Stone 
 
 
.                                                                        Puddle                                         
 
 
 
                       Figure 1.  Smart stick detects obstacles in front of the blind 
 

                      II. RELATED WORK 
 A. Advanced Electronics Based Smart Mobility Aid for the 
Visually Impaired Soceity 
 The realm of electronics is growing rapidly. Advanced electronics are employable in assisting the visually 
impaired society in various ways. According to World Health Organization (WHO) approximately 285 
million people are blind. Major researches have been under consideration on developing a smart stick 
for seeking a smoother routine life and welfare towards the blind society. This paper proposes and 
analyses a brand new thought in eliminating the stick and mount these sensors on the visually 
handicapped person body itself [4]. B. Real-time Dangling Objects Sensing: A Preliminary Design of 
Mobile Headset Ancillary Device for Visual Impaired This analysis planned a mobile Real-time Dangling 
Objects Sensing (RDOS) prototype, which found on the cap to sense any front barrier. This device utilizes 
low cost un-hearable sensing element to act as another complement eye for blinds to know the front 
hanging objects. The RDOS device will dynamically regulate the sensor’s front angle that's trusted the 
user’s body height and promote the sensing accuracy. Two major needed algorithms to measure the 
height-angle activity and un-hearable sensing element alignment and planned unit area. The analysis 
team additionally integrated the RDOS device with mobile automation devices by human action and 
Bluetooth to record the walking route. 
 
 
 
C. Assistive Infrared Sensor Based Smart Stick for Blind people- 
 In this paper authors tend to propose a smart stick with lightweight weight, low cost, user 
friendly, quick response and low power consumption and stick supported by infrared 
technology. A combination of infrared sensors will observe stair-cases and different obstacles 
presence within the user path. The experimental results gives good accuracy and therefore the 
stick is ready to observe all of obstacles 
 
D. Design and Implementation of Mobility Aid for Blind People. 
 The proposed system is a jacket which will have sensors mounted on it. There will be five 
sensors mounted on the jacket. One sensor detects potholes or stairs. The other obstacle near 
head. The three sensors are used to detect obstacles in front, right and left direction. The user 
is notified about the obstacle through specific voice commands which are stored in a Micro SD 
card. These instructions are played by the microcontroller and are heard by the user through 
the headphones 
 
 
                
                   II. Proposed System 
 
We have many reasons to design smart stick for blind; firstly, the blind to feel free, isn't 
surrounded by wires as in belt and its content. Secondly, is easy to use because it is familiar and 
affordable. Thirdly, to be able to detect obstacles that exist on the ground (this is not available 
in glasses), which he walks indoor and outdoor is faced by obstacles such as stairs, puddles and 
sidewalks.  The smart stick, as shown in Fig. 2, is basically an embedded system integrating the 
following: pair of ultrasonic sensor to detect obstacles in front of the blind from ground level 
height to head level height in the range of 400 cm a head, infrared sensor to detect upward and 
downward stairs. Ultrasonic sensors and infrared sensor collect real time data and send it to 
18F46K80 microcontroller. After processing this data, the microcontroller actives the motor to 
vibrate and invokes the right speech warning message stored in ISD 1932 through an earphone. 
Water sensor to detect water spreads, rechargeable battery to power the circuits.  
 
                                                                                                                                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    Microcontroller & sound kite 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Design of the smart stick Smart stick detects obstacles in front 
of the blind. 
  
       
 
 Figure 3. Block diagram of electronic smart stick. 
 
                          A. Sensors  
The  selection  process  of  appropriate  sensor  depends  on several  factors  such as,  
cost,atmospheric condition,  kind  of obstacle  to  be  detected,  detection  range,  and  the  
desired precision  of  measurements  collected  information  and  its transmission frequency as 
shown in Table I.  We used a combination of 2 types of sensors infrared and ultrasonic for the 
following reasons:  
 
a)  Infrared sensor recognize small obstacle but with less accuracy  than  laser  sensors.However  
using  laser  sensor  is costly which contradicts our aim in obtaining affordable aiding devices. 
They perform almost the same  within 2 meter. 
b)  Ultrasonic sensor work well for close obstacles unlikelaser one, when an object is so close 
the laser sensor (less than 15cm) can’t  get an  accurate reading.Moreover,  it  should  be noted  
that  radar  sensors  can  easily  detect  near  and  far obstacles with equal perform once, but 
their medium accuracy doesn't allow them detecting small obstacles. 
 
 
TABLE I. GENERAL CHARACTERISTIC OF SOME ACTIVE SENSORS 
 
                Laser           Infrared       Radar           Ultrasound 
Principle       Transmission    Transmission   Transmission    Transmission 
                and reception of and reception of   and reception  and reception of  
                light wave      pulse of IR    of microwave    acoustic  
                                light                          waves 
                                                                
Range           SLR:15cm to 120 From 20        About 150       From 3 cm  
                cm              cm to 15cm     to200m          to 10 m 
                LLR: About  10                                  
                to 50m 
Beam width                      fairly thin    Depended on     Wide 
                Narrow                         size of  
                                               antenna 
                                                
Atmospheric                                    Affected        Not  
                Affected        affected                       affected 
condition                                                       
Cost            Very High       LOW            HIGH            LOW 
                       SLR: short laser range, LLR: Long laser range 
 
Infrared sensor chosen has a  detection range  distance that goes from 20 to 200 cm, a 
resolution of 0.5 cm, a frequency of 26.3 Hz and an analogical output that goes from 0 to 5 V.   
Ultrasonic sensor used 40 kHz transmission signal. The 40 kHz frequency  is produced by a  
transmission sensor of two-centimeter  diameter;  it  can  generate  2.4644  beams  of  
narrowness.  This  is a  reasonable  size to  be  installed  in  the stick.  We use the infrared 
sensor to detect upward and downward stairs because  the sensor  spot is  roughly 6 cm. This  
feature enables  the  user to  identify  precisely,  any kind  of  stairs  in front of him.We  use  a  
pair  of  ultrasonic  sensor.  An  upper  one  at  a height 90 cm to detect upper obstacles and 
another sensor at a height 30 cm to detect low obstacles.  Detection using ultrasonic sensor is 
based on two factors:  
 
• Time of flight (TOF), the amount of delay between the emission of a sound and the arrival of 
an echo depending on the distance of an obstacle, which is directly proportional to the distance 
 
• Beam size: Obstacle size is depending on amount of reflected wave. Obstacles whose 
dimensions are larger than the beam size, all of the sound waves will be reflected to receiver. If 
the obstacle size small as compared to the beam size, the part of the ultrasonic sound wave will 
be reflected to the receiver and the rest will be lost as shown in Fig. 4. The speed at which 
sound travels depends on the medium it passes through. Broadly, the speed of sound is 
proportional to the square root of the ratio between the stiffness of the medium and its 
density. The speed of sound also changes with 
 
the atmospheric conditions. All obstacles reflect some part of the wave through. The amplitude 
of the wave reflected is relatively proportional to how much available surface there is on the 
obstacle, concerning coherent reflection. Also, surface area, shape and orientation, are major 
factors contributing to the strength of the reflected signal. 
 
 


                                                                              
Figure 4.    Small and large obstacle detection.   
     B. PIC Microcontroller 18F46K80 
 Researchers in [17, 18] used the microcontroller 16F877A. It has 3 disadvantages (1) it has no 
internal oscillator so we will need an external crystal as a clock source. (2) It has memory 256 
bytes of EEPROM. (3) It has 8 channels of 10-bit Analog-to-Digital (A/D) converter. The 
microcontroller 18F46k80 (MCU) [16] used to control the embedded system. The PIC 
microcontroller we used is simplified computer with a processor, memory and support for 
peripherals. The PIC simply runs the program in its memory when it is turned on and it doesn’t 
have an operating system. It has 200 ns instruction execution, 1024 bytes of EEPROM data 
memory, self-programming, an 2 ICD, 2 Comparators, 11 channels of 10-bit Analog-to-Digital 
(A/D) converter, 1 capture/ compare/ PWM functions, a synchronous serial port that can be 
configured as either 3-wire SPI or 1- 12wire C bus, a USART, and a Parallel Slave Port. Regulator 
LM7805 used to regulate the volt to +5V which input to microcontroller if the input voltage 
exceeds +5V. As shown in Fig. 5. When the MCU is started, it produces a 40 kHz wave with the 
duration of 300μs. It generates the pulse that will drive the ultrasonic emitter. After sending the 
pulse, the ADC of MC will read and convert the received wave from each ultrasonic receiver 
into a digital form. If the ultrasonic sensor received the signal, MC will calculate the distance. If 
the infrared sensor received the signal, MC will calculate average of the signal shape and 
amplitude. Accordingly, MC invokes the right speech warning message through an earphone. 
The proposed system was simulated using Proteus software (Simulation Program) [19] as 
shown in Fig. 6. The program code was written using C language. 
 
                                 
          
          
Figure 5. Flowchart of the proposed system. 
          
          
          
          
          
          
Figure 6. The whole circuit design using Proteus simulation.   
            
          
    
   C. Speech Warning Message  
Many researchers [5, 6, 14] used vibration array or buzzer based audio frequency clips for 
announcing any detection of obstacles. The proposed stick uses pre-recorded speech messages 
for conveying any detection of obstacle. It uses ISD1932 [20] circuit that contains a multiple-
message recording and playback device. This circuit can record up to 64 
seconds per message. It includes microphone inputs and speaker outputs as shown in Fig. 7. 
 
                                                                                      
             Figure 7. Voice record circuit in direct mode 
In the proposed system, we have recorded sixteen different speech warning messages 
depending on the distanceas to alert the user. We have added a capacitor of 4.7 µF and an 
external resistor of 100KΩ necessary to decrease recording duration to 21.2sec per message. 
 
                   D. Water Sensor 
 Water sensors available are used to detect water levels inside tanks and very expensive. Our objective is 
to detect water existence regardless its level. So we used a costless alternative. Two wire probes are 
shown in Fig. 8; they fit at the bottom of the stick to sense obstacle like water pits, puddles and water 
spread. Once wires touch water, the circuit is shorted, this interrupts the microcontroller, activates the 
vibration motor and play warning message saying: "Attention there is water". 
 
 


                                                                                        
       
                                                 Figure 8. Water sensor 
                  E. Vibration Motor  
This is the type of DC vibration motors used in mobile phones. It requires a voltage supply of 3V 
to 5V with current around 125 mA. This type of motors can be programmed to control its speed 
by using the PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) method. The PWM signal is generated from the 
TMR2 timer via interrupt control on RC2 and RC1 pins to gate this PWM to active the vibration. 
The diameter of the motor is 0.5 cm and the thickness is 2.5mm. 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  F. Calling the Stick 
 We used FM “frequency modulation” wireless communication to help the blind person to find 
the stick if it is far from him. Fig. 9 shows an RF transmitter that generates radio frequency 
waves in its circuits, and to this 'carrier signal', it adds the information part by modulating the 
carrier signal. This composite signal (carrier plus information) is then fed to an antenna. An RF 
receiver receives the signal at the same frequency from the atmosphere, by altering the Electric 
and Magnetic fields from its own antenna. The receiver circuits then strip the information part 
of the signal from the carrier part, and amplify this to a useful level for audio. 
 
                                                                                     
Figure 9. RF transmitter and receiver 
 
III. Results and Discussion Ultrasonic sensors, infrared sensor, PIC 18F46K80 and ISD1932 are 
tested individually as well as integrated. As ultrasonic sensors work on principle of echo, 
studying of its reflection on different obstacle is very important. The measurement cycle starts 
with microcontroller transmitting the 10µs high level pulse to the sensor trigger pin to start 
ranging (T1), then the sensor will send out ultrasonic signal with 40 kHz and 450µs (T2) and 
then wait to capture the rising edge output by echo port (T3) from 150µs: 25ms, depending on 
measured distance as shown in Fig. 10. In case of no obstacle (no signal reflected) it waits 38ms 
before it restarts transmission. 
 
                                          
                            
                                                                                 
 
                            Figure 10. Timing diagram 
 
 
 
 
Ultrasonic distance sensor uses time of flight (TOF) to detect obstacle - the output is a digital 
pulse which length is the time it takes for the sound to reach the target and return. 
 
Several experiments were done on obstacles at different distance and the average TOF results 
are shown in Fig. 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 Figure 11. Time of flight vs measured distance of ultrasonic 
sensor 
 
    Distance (cm)     Analog value          Analog value                     error 
                     calculated (mV        measured (mV) 

                                                     24                      1 mv 
         5                      
                              25 
                              50                    48.8                    1.8 mv 
         10 
         20                  100                    97.6                    2.4 mv 

         30                  150                    146.4                   3.6 mv 

         40                  200                    195.3                   4.7 mv 

         50                  250                   244.15                  5.85 mv 

         75                  375                    366                      9 mv 

        100                  500                    489                     11 mv 

        150                  750                    732                     16 mv 

        200                  1000                   976.6                  23.4 mv 

        250                  1250                  1220.7                  29.3 mv 

        300                  1500                  1464.9                  35.1 mv 

        350                  1750                   1709                    41 mv 

        400                  2000                  1953.2                  46.8 mv 


       TABLE II. RESULT OF ULTRASONIC SENSOR COMPARISON 
                                       
                                       
We tested how the ultrasonic sensors performance in lab compared to simulated calculation. 
  TABLE II and Fig. 12 are present comparison of the ultrasonic sensor analog voltage value 
 between the calculation value and measurement value. Thereafter the error is calculated in 
  small range 5:50 cm error is 1– 6 mv, medium range 75:200 cm error is 9 – 23 mv and far 
                       range 250:400 cm error is 30 – 47 mv 
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                       
                                                   
Figure 12. Difference between calculated and measured value 
                    TABLE III. COMPARISON OF OTHER DEVICES 
 
                                                                              
                                                                  Stairs & 
          Devices            Detection    Time        Power        Water       Porta
                              Range     Response   Consumption     Detectio     ble 
                                                                   n 
                                                                              
         Proposed              High        Fast        Low           Yes        Yes 
          System 
                                                                              
  Vibration and Voice          Low       medium        Low           No         Yes 
   Operated Navigation 
   System for Visually 
   Impaired Person 
                                                                              
 A Smart Infrared            Medium        Fast        Low           No         yes 
         Microcontroller-
         Based Blind 
         Guidance System 
                                                                              
  Ultrasonic Spectacles and    High        Fast        Low           No         yes 
    Waist-belt for Visually 
    Impaired and Blind 
    Person 

 
 
 
To evaluate the performance of this stick, testing is performed in real world, by actual 
beneficiaries (trained and untrained) blind people. Two experiments have been carried out 
using a number of obstacles. The experiment was conducted by six blind people from which 
two were trained on using the stick and four were not. During experiment, a blind person was 
asked to walk through the testing area where different type of obstacles has been placed within 
15 meter range. The user’s walking speed is recorded. Time taken by trained and untrained for 
successfully walking through the obstacles is measured as shown in Fig. 13. Then we calculated 
the average speed of trained users to be 0.80 m/s and untrained users to be 0.41 m/s. In 
comparison with the traveling speed of the sighted people be (1.4 m/s). This result shows that 
training of the user reflected in gaining twice traveling speed and also increased the user trust 
in avoiding obstacles in free path. 
 
 
 
                                                                                   
Figure 13. Performance and accuracy of the smart stick 
 
The proposed system should be compared with available and up to date technology. Several 
parameters should be considered to evaluate the performance of the proposed guidance 
system such as the range of detection, time response and power consumption. 
 
 
• The first parameter is the range of detection. A tool which can find obstacles throughout 0-2m 
can be considered as a low range device, 2-4m as medium range, while higher than 4m is 
considered as high range. 
 
 • The second parameter is the response time, and a system sensing and responding 0–100ms is 
regarded as fast, 100–200ms medium and higher than 200ms as slow.  
 
• The third important parameter is the power consumption of the system and how long it will 
stay working without the need to recharge. The following ratings are considered: consumption 
of an electrical power of 0 0.5W is regarded as low power, 0.5–1W as medium consumption, 
and higher than 1W as high consumption.  
 
• The device is portable if it is light in weight and the user can easily wear for extended period 
of time otherwise it is considered non-portable 
 
 
. We compared our performance with last 5 years literature with 3 devices. Vibration and Voice 
Operated Navigation System for Visually Impaired Person [17] consists of three ultrasonic 
sensors, PIC microcontroller16F877A using the feedback through vibration and voice alerts the 
user if any obstacle is around and within 70cm, A Smart Infrared Microcontroller-Based Blind 
Guidance System [18] consists of three infrared sensor, microcontroller 16F877A using 
feedback through vibration and tune speakers warn the user if any obstacles is around within 2 
m, Ultrasonic Spectacles and Waist-belt for Visually Impaired and Blind Person [21] consists of 
five ultrasonic sensors, APR9600 audio recording and playback flash memory, earphone with 
AT89S52 microcontroller. The comparison is shown in TABLE III. 
 
 
 

                    IV. Conclusion  
The Smart Stick acts as a basic platform for the coming generation of more aiding devices to 
help the visually impaired to be more safe. It is effective and afford. It leads to good results in 
detecting the obstacles lying ahead of the user in a range of four meters, detecting stairs and 
water pits. This system offers a low-cost, reliable, portable, lowpower consumption and robust 
solution for navigation with obvious short response time. Though the system is hard-wired with 
sensors and other components, it's light in weight. Further aspects of this system can be 
improved via wireless connectivity between the system components, thus, increasing the range 
of the ultrasonic sensor and implementing a technology for determining the speed of 
approaching obstacles. While developing such an empowering solution, visually impaired and 
blind people in all developing countries were on top of our priorities. 
